so we're very proud this year to be
presenting the tetrapylon at the gray
area festival as she was that said
you've probably all seen it
coming in if actually look behind you
you can still see it there this is a 3d
printed sculpture but also a virtual 3d
model that was produced in collaboration
between an austin-based 3d printing
company called Rey 3d also with Creative
Commons and the new Palmira project and
it's based on the work of Syria Syrian
Palestinian basil Carter bill since the
general theme in the exhibition for the
gray area festival this year is
distributed systems in blockchain I also
wanted to use this opportunity to
explore the ways in which a work of art
can exist in relation to these new
technologies so this is the exhibition
view currently now in a gray area
festival but before we get to this work
here now I wanted to give you a general
timeline for the tetrapylon so Palmyra
is a small city in central Syria it's
about a hundred and forty miles
northeast of Damascus the site is home
to numerous ancient monumental
architectural projects some of which
date back to the first and second
centuries when Palmyra was integrated
into the Roman Empire this is an
artist's rendering from the 1800s that's
actually not very accurate but it gives
you an idea for what people imagined it
might have looked like at that time and
it gives you a little bit of a better
view than looking at the the sculpture
itself so this tetrapylon was erected
toward the end of the 3rd century it's a
square platform and on each corner
there's a grouping of four columns and
the columns are holding up a about 150
ton corner
and in the middle there's a pedestal
which would have carried a statue which
may or may not have looked like what you
see in this image I here's a photograph
from the actual site this gives you a
much better idea of the size of the
tetrapylon against the human scale and
you can see in the middle here the
pedestals which would have carried the
statues the tetrapylon was partially
restored in the 1960s if you look
closely you can see that the columns in
these are actually concrete I believe
there's only one that's actually
original so even back then there was
still some you know intervention or
maybe concrete 3d printing of the
tetrapylon in the 1980 palmyra was
designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site
jumping ahead to 2004 a palestinian
syrian computer engineer and open-source
contributor named basil carter bill
began a research project in cooperation
with the publishing company aloes their
project was to create a 3d model of a
lot of the buildings in Palmyra
unfortunately the work was never
released this is a rendering from the
temple of bel from that project but we
don't actually have any of the 3d data
at this time Bessel would go on from
this project to found Aiki lab it was
the first hackerspace in Syria and he
later served as the project lead and
public affiliate for Creative Commons
Syria through his work basil kind of
became one of the most visible
open-source developers in the Middle
East and the Arab world and you'd go to
participate in projects throughout the
world including in the Middle East East
Asia and Europe unfortunately his
contributions to free software came to
an end during the civil uprising in the
Syrian civil war on March 15 2012 which
was
the one-year anniversary uprising basil
was arrested in Damascus and imprisoned
by the government without trial while
Basil's family and friends petitioned
for his release
Palmyra broke into the global conscience
again in 2015 when ISIL captured the
city of Palmyra
and began systematically destroying many
of its prominent archaeological sites
this I think is the temple of bel in
after it was destroyed and the
tetrapylon itself was destroyed in 2017
unfortunately basil was never able to
share in the new creative output from
the project that he started after being
in prison for three years he was
executed in secret in 2015 by the Syrian
government a fact that we didn't even
know for another two years
the project itself though we consider
founded in 2015 this is the URL it's had
a number of exhibitions throughout this
time some with the tetrapylon and some
with other buildings from Palmyra so
even the tetrapylon that we see now is
not the first iteration of the idea it
started as a 3d model of this piece
which was exhibited through the
Victorian Albert Museum at the Venice
architectural Biennale in 2016 this the
modeling work was by Ann Schneider and
Jim Ellis and it's sort of the cornice
but it's been chromed and was exhibited
as part of the world of fragile parts
the sculpture that we see now outside
was printed by the texas-based re 3d
it's composed of 25 separate pieces
together it weighs about 200 pounds and
is about seven and a half feet tall and
apparently it took about 800 hours to
print and they said it was I think the
most extensive project they'd ever
printed
for looking at the model it contains
about 2.6 million vertices and about 250
6 million bytes of data which maybe that
sounds like a lot it's only 256
megabytes I say only but size isn't
really everything but it's critical to
understanding how a digital work like
the chatter pylon can interact with a
public blockchain like Bitcoin and
aetherium so people often ask me since I
work in blockchain technologies can we
put the tetrapylon on the blockchain I
get asked this a lot the simple answer
is well well no but the question is it's
more general question which is can you
put a work of art on the blockchain but
it's actually an even more general
question can you put data on the
blockchain because people say well look
it's a database right so can you put
data in it so I'm going to try to answer
this question for Bitcoin and also
aetherium so Bitcoin let's start there
so in the blockchain for Bitcoin the
basic record is a transaction this is
sort of an illustration of the most
common transaction type in Bitcoin here
it's showing basically 1 input which is
you know from Alice she's signed and
it's going to two outputs one is paying
Bob and the other output is going back
to Alice the transaction will have this
information the input and output and it
will also have a very simple script
that's used to verify that the Bitcoin
can be spent in this way so this is sort
of a code representation of the the
output just the output part which is
like the pay Bob pay Alice so the first
effort to add metadata to the blockchain
actually abused the setup by writing a
message
into one of the outputs of the
transaction so normally it's gonna have
a hash but you could just write
arbitrary data they're like you know hi
happy birthday John or something in that
you know along with the timestamp is a
birthday greeting but this had a problem
so if you look at the how the Bitcoin
network works in order for the Bitcoin
to be spent you have to find what's
called an unspent transaction which is
an output from a transaction that has
not been sending has not been used as an
input to another transaction so if you
have these kind of junk messages like
you just write a write junk data into it
the Bitcoin network doesn't have an easy
way to identify whether the the script
is valid or not so we would have to
basically keep it in memory all the time
this had the potential to balloon the
size of the mempool and because you had
these what are called provably unapprove
ibly not provably on spendable you know
out outputs for a transaction so there
was a innovation in the Bitcoin protocol
to get around this called an opera turn
the opera turn is basically an opcode in
the script that says that will always
evaluate to false meaning it's not a
valid transaction it's not a valid
output which would tell the Bitcoin node
that this is not a valid transaction and
you can throw it away from the mempool
so within the script there's an example
here you can fit about 80 bytes of data
that's not even enough for a single
tweet and considering that the average
Bitcoin transaction is only 225 bytes
it's not really a very efficient use of
a transaction to include metadata in it
like this so imagine if we wanted the
tetrapylon to be encoded in these you
know opera turns it would take something
like 3 million transactions to do it
somebody can probably calculate with
so an alternative to adding the file
itself into the blockchain is to add
some other representation of it this
could be something like a cryptographic
hash of the file and that would only
take about it take 32 bytes to do that
and that would easily fit in the Opera
turn code and the example here is
something kind of like proof of
existence where you can take the op
return doc proof is sort of the protocol
and ASCII and then you can include the
the cryptic the sha-256 cryptographic
hash of the file so aetherium how things
work here the situation for aetherium is
better than Bitcoin because you have
more options for the data types and the
structure the data that you can store
however it's still going to be
prohibitively expensive to include a
large amount of data on the etherium in
an ethereal contract and this is kind of
by design in the same way that you know
we don't want to be adding a lot of data
to the Bitcoin network we also don't
want to be doing that too for aetherium
so we don't really want to upload a file
to the network we want to reserve the
etherium contract for very valuable data
such as who is the owner which address
is associated with some information etc
so here's sort of an example in
aetherium of what a an artwork how an
artwork could be represented and as far
as metadata goes we could have things
like the artist title maybe a hash
cryptographic hash of the file etc of
the year and maybe some address there
would be associated with the owner of
the artwork and this is kind of the best
we can get on aetherium
at least for now we could add other
information like ownership usage rights
and maybe providence information but
this shouldn't stop us from getting an
you know sort of diving into aetherium
from a development perspective if you
want to know a little bit more about the
development stack for
cerium the main programming language is
called solidity and some of the toolset
uses things like truffle it's a node.js
framework ganache which is a development
blockchain that you can run locally and
then meta mask which is a browser
plug-in that actually gives you your
wallet unless you interact with websites
that are that are programmed using
aetherium but if you really want to
learn how to create works or interact
with a blockchain you really have to
approach it like studying a programming
language that's going to mean that
you're gonna have to look at things like
data types you have billions integers
addresses things like this you're also
going to have to learn about the the
features of language control structures
events etc and then finally learn more
about how contracts work what is
available in the standard library etc so
this is actually an example of solidity
I'm not sure we've we've seen where Rob
kind of showed a piece of an old version
but this is the sort of a hello world
solidity contract at the top it has the
programming version the contract sort of
a state variable the greeting and then a
function that you can call I'm glad that
Rob was here actually I put this slide
in before intending to talk about it but
he kind of beat me to it this is
actually the work that Rob was talking
about you know in real life where you
can have that this is art this is not
art and you can pay into the contract
just for the simple transaction for you
to change it I didn't know if I should
share Rob's code it is open-source but
it's always like oh man it's
embarrassing when you show my code so I
rewrote it a little bit
so I robbed I rewrote this just so it
would compile with no warnings so at
least it's like at least it's valid now
but you know this was he was two years
ago so things change but this is now you
know code for is art by Rob Myers and
now you know by Christopher Adams but it
really it's really not so scary it's a
very small you know contract so in
comparison to you know this like well
can I put a work if I have a work of art
can I put it on the blockchain the
answer is kind of like well no or maybe
you shouldn't but can I create a work of
art on the blockchain that Dan answer is
definitely yes and I encourage anybody
who's you know has a little bit of wants
to get into programming to try this it's
for me it's fun and it kind of reminds
me of like the early days of internet
and web programming so my kind of my
conclusion about this is the blockchain
is immutable and it's essentially
indestructible which is very unlike you
know the frail physical remnants of lost
civilizations so for this reason it's
kind of an attractive platform for the
preservation of cultural data although
there are obvious technical and physical
fiscal limitations to using it like this
and for that all conclude
[Applause]